Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Mac OS X Applications
Technology Manager,
David Wright.
Thank you.
Good afternoon.
Welcome to session 126, Cocoa Overview.
I'm really excited to see how
many people are here because this
technology in this session is amazing.
In 1991, when I was in college,
I was taking a windowing
programming class,
and I was working with
X windows most of the time.
So seeing what they were trying
to do to get inheritance to
go was pretty interesting,
especially to someone who was barely
grasping pointers at the time.
And then we had a couple
weeks where we were playing
with other windowing systems,
and there was this black cube,
and we were told to do a
programming assignment on that.
So just,
can I get a clap of hands of how many
of you have used Cocoa or played with
Interface Builder or Project Builder?
Yeah?
I think half,
but my sound meter isn't always accurate.
Well, I was playing with this program
called Interface Builder.
You tell it what objects
you want to work with,
and then you draw this line,
and it hooks up all this messaging.
And I was just tripping out,
because it was amazing.
I've never seen something like that.
So then I went on to be a Mac programmer,
and in 1988,
I was assigned to work on the
setup assistant for Mac OS X,
which is completely written in Cocoa.
And here I was back using this
amazing development environment.
So I have no problems.
I represent Carbon and Cocoa.
Both are great.
But Cocoa is like a true pleasure.
It really is like driving
this amazing car that,
you know, you just want to use
it as soon as you can.
So without further delay,
I want to introduce you to the Cocoa API.
I want to introduce Becky Willrich from
the Cocoa Application Development team.
Please give her a warm welcome.
Thanks, David.
Gee, Toto, I don't think we're in
Redwood City anymore.
So hi, my name's Becky Willrich,
and I'm here to talk to you about
the Cocoa development environment.
We're going to start out by
looking briefly at what Cocoa is.
I'm going to show you a little bit about
how you develop a Cocoa application,
and then we're going to spend
most of our time talking about
the core concepts within Cocoa.
So, by the time you leave this session,
you should be able to identify
the main pieces within Cocoa.
That includes listing the core classes
involved in every Cocoa application.
We're also going to talk some about the
basic abstractions used inside of Cocoa.
Now,
I would love to go into the details of
Project Builder and Interface Builder.
These are amazing development tools.
In particular, if you've never seen IB,
you have just got to go to the session.
PB and IB both have
sessions of their own,
and I encourage you to go to those
because we're just not going to
have time to cover them here.
So hopefully you've all seen a
diagram that looks more or less
like this from the keynotes.
It's an example of the
OS X architecture stack.
And it's pretty easy to
see where Cocoa fits in.
We're one of those development
environments right up there at the top.
So what is Cocoa?
Cocoa is a set of frameworks
designed to work together
for application development.
So far, so good.
It's fully featured.
It has support for all of the basic
paradigms that you expect to see
inside of an application environment.
So support for things like cut and paste,
event handling, full widget set,
full text system, all of that is there.
There are also several powerful
abstractions we export to make it easier
for you to write your application.
But here's the main thing.
When someone asks you, "What is Cocoa?
What makes Cocoa different from the
rest of the stack?" There's the answer.
Cocoa is objects.
This is what differentiates
us from Carbon.
This is what makes us
unique on this stack.
So what do I mean by that?
What I mean is that Cocoa is a set
of fully object-oriented frameworks.
These frameworks have been
designed and implemented in
objects from the ground up.
The APIs are exported in
object-oriented languages,
both Java and Objective-C,
and all the classes have been
designed with the intent that you,
the developer, be able to simply extend
them and use them easily.
So, as I was preparing for this talk,
I was thinking, oh my gosh,
what am I going to tell these people,
right?
Here, you're all Mac programmers,
you've already learned
one very large API,
how can I convince you that
Cocoa is worth looking at?
So, this is what I came up with.
We're just going to see, take a poll,
we're going to do the
little plazometer thing,
and see if you can guess how many
lines of code are inside of TextEdit.
TextEdit is a small Cocoa application
that does text editing,
it's sort of the Cocoa world's
equivalent of simple text.
So, just clap when you think
I've reached the right level.
How many of you think it's
under 5,000 lines of code?
twenty thousand?
You guys already know the
answer to this don't you?
Alright fine.
Yes!
Text edit is an example application.
It's under five thousand lines of code.
It comes in at thirty three hundred.
By comparison,
simple text is seventeen thousand,
eight hundred.
Over five times as large.
You can prove this to yourself by
looking on your DP4 CD where you can
find the text edit code under system
examples... or system developer examples
and just take a look for yourself.
Well that's all very well and good.
Text edit is, as I said,
an example program.
What about a real program?
What about mail?
Mail, I hope you've seen in some of
the keynotes that Steve has done.
He showed it at the
Macworld keynote in January.
It is the premier
Cocoa app on the system.
And it's a full mail client.
Let's start from the other end.
How many think it's over a million lines?
Between a half million and one million.
Between a hundred thousand
and a half million.
This isn't going to work so well.
Between 20,000 and 100,000.
You're right.
Mail comes in at 65,000 lines of code,
which to me is pretty impressive.
I mean, here we've got a full
deployment application.
If you attended some of
the keynotes yesterday,
you were hearing line counts on the
orders of three-quarter million or
1.2 million for a full production app.
So let's drill a little further into
those 65,000 lines of code and mail.
Of those 65,000 lines,
over a quarter of them are just comments.
So we come out at under 50,000
lines of actual production code.
Of those, you can further break it down
into a third of them going
into the application itself.
The other two-thirds is going
into a framework which is shared
across several applications.
So not only is Mail a
very small application,
but we're actually
reusing most of the code.
So, to answer the question, why Cocoa?
The answer is that objects are powerful.
And this is going to
read pretty much like,
you know, the textbook speech on
object-oriented programming.
Objects are easy to configure,
they're easy to extend via subclassing
and other simple abstractions.
You can export many powerful abstractions
and notions using an object architecture,
and it is ideal for code reuse.
The end result is that you,
the developer,
can do more with less code.
So when we were going
over those line counts,
I was talking to a coworker of mine,
Mike Ferris.
And he said, you know,
3,300 lines is actually quite a bit.
We've got a lot of support
for loading different file
extensions and that kind of thing.
And we could actually do
text edit in quite a few--
"I think I can give you
text edit in 50 lines."
I said, "Yeah, right." He said, "No,
really." And we're going to take
him up on that challenge here today.
So with that,
I'm going to introduce Mike Ferris
and turn the stage over to him.
Is my mic live here?
Can you all hear me?
Okay.
All right,
so we're going to just start by creating
a brand new project in Project Builder.
See, we're up on the screen here.
And today I'm going to create a
document-based application using Java.
So we'll choose the Java document-based
application template.
And let's just call this TextEdit Lite.
OK.
So what we start out with here is,
as you can see, a couple of source files
and a few resources.
We have two user interface files,
which are interface builder nib files.
And just to prove that we're not starting
with a whole bunch of canned code,
I'll show you all the code
that we start with here.
This is the little piece of C code that
gets us bootstrapped so that we can
double-click this Java application.
And then this is the document subclass,
the subclass of the NSDocument object
that we start out with by default.
So that's going to represent our
document in the running application?
Exactly.
We'll have one instance of this
object for each open document.
OK.
And you can see that we've started
out with just some boilerplate code.
There's a few methods where we're
expected to fill some stuff in here.
That's not going to leave
you with very many lines.
No.
We've started out with, what,
30 or so already.
So I'm already behind.
So first, though, let's do the interface.
And we're going to build the
interface in Interface Builder.
We've started out with a
nib file that's going to be
instantiated once per document.
It's called mydocument.nib.
So we'll just open that up real
quick in Interface Builder.
So this is going to be the
window that's going to display
the document to the user?
Exactly.
OK.
Now we'll get rid of the
little placeholder text here.
And instead, we're going to add a text
object off of the palette.
And let's bring the inspector up here
and configure this just a little bit.
We'll take the border away, turn on undo,
should always be able to undo.
And let's make it so that
when the window changes size,
this text view will change size as well.
And then let's make it
fill the window too.
Okay, so starting to look a little
bit like a text editor here.
Now,
the other thing that we're going to need
is access to our text view from our code.
So let's go to the classes
tab in Interface Builder here.
And in our document class,
we've already got a
pointer to the window,
but let's add another one.
So let's add this instance variable
that we'll just call myTextView.
And we'll go back to the Instances tab,
and let's actually make that connection.
So we've told Interface Builder
that we have this instance
variable called myTextView,
and that we've also told it
that this is the TextView.
So that's how the document's going
to be able to reach its interface?
Exactly.
What'll happen is when the
document loads its interface,
part of the loading of this
interface file is going to cause the
instance variable myTextView to be
automatically initialized to point to
the TextView that came out of the nib.
So when you say load the interface file,
I mean, are you generating code here?
No, actually,
Interface Builder files are not code.
We're not a code generator.
In fact, what you're manipulating
here is all live objects,
and then what happens when you
save this is it's just going
to serialize all those objects.
Just like Java serialization,
that kind of thing?
Basically.
Okay.
So, all right,
we're done with the interface.
We've made our connection.
We've set up our TextView.
Now, I'm not going to sit here
and let you watch me type.
So instead, I've got kind of a pre-done
version of this class,
and we'll just get rid of the
one that we came with here.
And instead,
let's go and add in the one that I've
already got in my Documents folder here.
Now,
you better walk us through this so that,
you know, we know you're not loading
libraries on the side or anything.
You think I'm going to be sneaky?
All right, well, let's put this in here,
and then I'll show you.
Now, in fact, this is almost identical to
the code that we started with.
And what I've added, I've added a couple
of instance variables.
First,
we see the MyTextView instance variable,
which is what we hooked
up in Interface Builder.
And then we also have the
TextStorage instance variable.
The TextStorage class provides
the backing store for our text.
All right.
Now, mostly this is all the same,
except when we get down
to about this point.
Let's start from the bottom.
And we're just going to,
I'm not going to walk you
through this line by line,
but briefly,
these two methods are concerned
with saving and loading the file.
I think I saw those in the template.
Yeah, these two were there and empty in
the template that we started with.
I've just filled them in.
Okay.
And notice that we're
not running save panels,
we're not writing files,
we're not doing any of this.
All that you really have to do
in a document app is be able to
provide the data that will go on
the disk and take the data that was
on the disk and initialize from it.
So, we're just working at the level of a
bunch of bytes that came off the disk.
We don't know how they came off the disk.
They're just here.
Now, the next method that we
started with in the template,
just empty, and which I've filled in,
is this one.
This method gets called whenever
the document loads its interface.
So we're going to take that opportunity
to make sure that the text view
is displaying the text that we
loaded from the disk or whatever.
So we'll just take that
opportunity to sync everything up.
And we do that with a new
method that I've added.
So this is the one brand new
method I've added to this class.
And all it does is it makes sure
that the text view is showing the
contents of that text storage object.
So you're just kind of updating
the backing store in the front end
and keeping everything in sync.
Exactly.
Now, that's all the code.
And we're almost ready to run this thing.
But first we need to make sure that
the application knows what kind of
files that it's going to deal with.
We haven't told it that
it's an RTF editor yet.
So we're going to go
into the target editor.
And in Project Builder,
this is where you edit
your info P list stuff.
And if you've read some of
that system overview book,
you'll know that the info P list is
where your application is going to
advertise what file types it understands.
Now, Finder uses this information
to know what app to launch when
you double-click something.
In addition,
the Cocoa document system uses it.
as well to know what kind of
documents this app understands.
So this is just sort of
publishing what kind of types
of document you want to handle.
Right.
And so we give it an abstract type name,
which would just be
something basically unique.
We can also tell it what file
extensions this type is associated
with and also what Mac OS types.
Okay, so we're kind of hooking up the
extension with the type creator,
with mime type, all of that.
Right.
Rolled together.
Okay.
So and then the last thing in here is
that in Cocoa Apps you have a key that
tells you what class in your application
is to be used to display these documents.
And in our case it's this my document
class that we are going to use.
So that's it.
And now I'm going to go ahead
and build and run this thing.
So you're telling me you're done?
I am done.
I didn't see any code in there to control
the menus or -- The menus -- oh look,
I didn't save the interface folder file.
Okay.
So the menus are already -- The menu is
already all hooked up in the template,
and you get basically a standard
menu bar when you create this thing.
And that includes all sorts of
menu items for dealing with cut,
copy, paste,
and all the rest of that kind of stuff.
Well, we'll just see, won't we?
Okay.
Why don't you take project
builder off the back of that?
Oh yes, let's minimize that.
Okay, so here's our program.
Okay,
now when we were preparing for this,
I created a list of some simple
text features that I would really
like to see in this text editor.
So if we could have the
slides back on one of these.
Over there.
Ah, thank you.
Let's start out real simple.
Just prove to me that you
can enter rich text up there.
Okay,
well let's go to the font panel for that.
Cocoa has a built-in font panel
that all apps can make use of,
and of course it's integrated
with the text system.
So we can do things like change
the font size and change the font.
And can you embed a feature?
Yeah, there we go.
Yeah, maybe we can set that to be italic.
Okay.
What about pasteboard,
clipboard kind of stuff?
Can you copy and paste?
Sure, of course.
So let's copy that and
maybe we can paste it.
Maybe we can paste it a few more times.
Okay, how about ruler support?
Well, Cocoa also has a built-in ruler,
which also is integrated
with the text system.
So we can just tell it,
"Show me the ruler." And here it is.
You can see that we have tab
stops and margin settings.
We can set the alignment.
We can do all the things you'd
expect to do from a ruler.
All right, how about colored text?
I didn't see you hook up
any color panel or anything.
The Cocoa color panel also is
integrated with the text system,
so we can just drag colors off
and set the color of the text.
We can use the apply button, too.
Okay.
Most of the code you wrote had to do
with saving and opening documents,
so let's just make sure that all works.
Okay.
So we can save.
You'll notice that we
have a sheet already.
The document system runs saved.
It can save panels of
sheets like it should,
so you get that all just automatically.
We can just type in a file
name and tell it to save.
Okay.
And you'll notice that the
title bar updated to show that
we've now got a named document.
Okay.
Why don't you close and reopen that
just to make sure we can reload files.
Okay.
There it is.
There it is, and we just open it back up.
OK.
Undo.
Probably need code for undo.
Well, we actually,
if you were paying attention,
I turned on the undo in the
interface builder file there.
And the text system supports undo.
In itself, but also when the text system
lives inside of a document,
it'll automatically hook itself
up to the document's undo,
and we'll get per document undo
in our text system automatically.
So I'm just making a couple changes
here so we'll have something to undo.
And you can see that I can do undo.
I can do multiple
levels of undo and redo.
Hmm.
Let's try again.
There we go.
All right, that one's not really fair.
I mean,
ligatures and kerning you'd only really
expect on a real publishing package.
Well, if you look closely,
we actually have ligatures already.
The text system will use
ligatures when it's appropriate,
just automatically.
You can also tell it that you'd like it
not to use even the default ligatures,
for example,
and so we can split that fi apart.
We also have support for track kerning.
So you can go ahead and just
tighten that line up a little bit.
It's getting harder.
Spell checking.
Well, turns out Cocoa also has an
integrated spell checker,
but to show that, we're going to have to
actually have a misspelling.
OK.
Whoops.
And so we can just bring
up the spell panel.
Just bring up the spell panel.
Exactly.
Now this spell panel,
like a lot of this other stuff,
is pre-integrated with the text system,
but it's also available for you to use
in your own ways in your Cocoa app.
So we can just go ahead
and tell it to find,
and it found our word,
and it even knows how it's
supposed to be spelled,
so we can just correct that and move on.
OK.
The Cocoa Text System is based on
Unicode and is also integrated with the
TSM input management stuff in Mac OS X.
All I really need to do is go
up here and change to Japanese.
Now I have to apologize if this turns
out to be a swear word or something.
I don't actually know Japanese.
It looks like the font
panel automatically picked a
Japanese font for you there.
Right.
The text system knows what characters
can be displayed in what fonts.
If you are typing in Helvetica, say,
and start typing some Japanese characters
that can't be displayed in Helvetica,
it's going to go out and look for
another font which is similar to
Helvetica and use that instead.
A recent documents menu.
That can't be standard in the template.
All right.
Well, in order to show that,
let me actually do a
save as for this guy.
So we'll have played with a couple
of different documents here.
So we'll just save this guy as test two.
And now you get an open recent
menu just automatically,
and it's hooked up so that any
time a document is opened or saved,
that document will end up in the open
recents menu for your application.
So I can go over to the original
one that we saved earlier and
just open that up that way.
Wow.
You got me.
However, there is one important piece
of every application left that
I'm sure you haven't hooked up.
What's that?
Do you have an about box?
Sure.
The template comes with
a standard about box,
which of course you can
replace if you like,
but we have an about box.
That's it.
Actually,
it was 51 if you count the blank lines,
I think.
Okay.
All right.
Thank you very much.
No problem.
If you are not now convinced
that Cocoa can do a lot for you,
I give up.
I don't know what else to say.
I do have a couple points
I want to make about that demo.
Obviously,
we are leveraging a couple different
subsystems within Cocoa pretty hard.
Those subsystems are the document
architecture and the text subsystem.
Both of those are subsystems
of several different classes
designed to work with each other,
all of them designed for
subclassability and ease of use.
If you are interested in them,
I highly recommend that you come to the
in-depth talk on Thursday afternoon,
because Mike is going to be back
talking about the document architecture,
and my manager, Ali,
is going to be speaking
on the text subsystem.
The other thing I want to point out
is that this is not a 4GL kind of
thing where you get to take it out
of the box and use it exactly as is,
or you can't use it for your purposes.
To give an example of that,
the text subsystem is used by a couple
different applications in DP4 and OSX.
One is Mail, which uses it pretty much
without modification.
Mail just wants to be able to
edit rich text for your mail.
Another one is an HTML editor
that's used by the WebObjects folks.
There, what they've done is they've
heavily subclassed and
extended the text subsystem,
which is designed to work, as you saw,
with RTF,
but they have been able to extend
it to create a full HTML editor.
All right, moving on,
we're going to start talking about
the pieces inside of Cocoa now.
There are basically two
components inside of Cocoa:
Foundation and AppKit.
And you can see how they lay here.
Foundation is the lower level.
It provides all the basic object
infrastructure that you would expect.
It does not use graphics at all.
And then the AppKit sits above
Foundation and also above Quartz,
OpenGL, QuickTime,
the entire application services stack.
So I'm going to spend a moment now
talking about Foundation in detail.
As I said,
Foundation establishes the basic object
paradigms within the Cocoa application.
That includes all the basic classes for
storing and manipulating data as objects.
It lives below the graphics layer,
and you can't actually
use Foundation without the
kit to produce something,
a faceless application,
something that needs to run
in the background and never
presents a window to the user.
So if you look at the
classes inside of Foundation,
they basically fall into
these three categories.
You have basic classes for storing data
and for holding the data together in
collections like arrays and dictionaries.
Then you have a set of classes that are
designed to act as object abstractions
on top of the operating system,
so you don't have to drop down
to the POSIX layer or to lower
layers in the operating system.
And then finally, we have support for
internationalization and localization.
So let's just start with
the storage classes.
Very briefly, the leafs are NSValue,
which stores a numeric value, NSString,
which stores a string, and NSData,
which can be used to store
an arbitrary bag of bytes.
Those can be combined
together into collections,
like NSArray,
which is simply an array of objects,
or NSDictionary, which stores the objects
in key-value pairs.
All these classes can be combined
together in what we call a property list.
And what's nice about property lists
is having combined together this
fairly complex tree of objects,
you can then write it out as a plain text
format and read it back in very simply.
There is also an XML format in addition
to the traditional ASCII format that's
available through Core Foundation.
And what we've found historically is
that property lists are ideal as a small,
flexible data store for
data throughout the system.
Mike alluded to the Info.plist.
That's a property list and is used to
configure your application and expose it,
explain how it should be
represented to Finder and to the
other applications on the system.
We also use the property list to
store all of our user preferences.
There are a number of small,
Unix-ish configuration files that
are expressed as XML property lists.
And we even use it as a communication
medium on the pasteboard.
Property lists are really cool,
and I'd love to tell
you more about it still,
but I'm not going to have time,
and so I'm just going to point you to
the core foundation session where we talk
about property lists in greater detail.
Okay,
the next category is OS installation.
There are a number of classes there
for handling things like file access.
I have a list up there.
Process management,
so you can keep track of the
different threads in your application.
You can fork off additional tasks,
and you can get the information
that the operating system has
collected about your process.
We also have mechanisms in
there for cross-thread and
cross-process communication,
and I've just listed two.
Internationalization.
We consider internationalization
and localization extremely
important in Cocoa,
and for that reason we've
included it in the basic classes
inside of our lowest layer,
which is Foundation.
NSString,
which is what we use to represent
all strings in the system,
stores its characters as unicars.
It has support for converting
to and from all the different
encodings that you would expect,
and we use it everywhere in our
APIs in place of char stars.
On the localization side,
we use NSBundle and NSUserDefaults.
Perhaps you've heard about the
new application packaging model.
NSBundle is what allows you to
go in and take the pieces apart.
You can specify all of your
resource files by localization,
by language as well,
and then NSBundle allows you to
retrieve the proper one at runtime
based on the user's preferences.
The user's preferences is
where NSUserDefaults come in.
NSUserDefaults defines,
among other things,
several different localization
defaults which are stored per user.
So NSBundle will, for you,
look up the correct localization
for the current user and load
the correct image for you.
That's all the time I have
to spend on foundation.
And I want to move on now to
start talking about the kit,
because this is really where you're
going to see the heart of the
infrastructure for your application.
So the kit is where we have the entire
infrastructure for drawing and event
handling in a Cocoa application.
In addition to that infrastructure,
we provide all the standard controls
ready to use out of the box.
As you saw, there's also a sophisticated
text engine in there.
All the standard dialogues are up there.
We tend to call those panels,
so there are things like the color panel,
save panel, font panel, open panel,
all of those things that
you saw in TextEdit Lite.
And as I said before,
AppKit relies on Foundation for
its object structure and the
application services layer for
its graphics and event handling.
So what I'm going to do is walk you
through the core classes in the kit,
and then we're going to spend
a little time talking about the
abstractions inside the kit.
[Transcript missing]
One of the subclasses of
NS Responder is NS Application.
NS Application is concrete,
where NS Responder was abstract.
So you would never instantiate
a plain NS Responder.
On the other hand,
there is a single NS Application instance
in your application.
This instance is what is responsible
for managing all the communication with
the rest of the surrounding system,
with the dock, with the Windows Server,
and so on.
NS Application also maintains a
list of all the Windows inside
of your application,
and it's responsible for running
the app's main event loop,
run loop.
And during that run loop,
what it's going to do is it's going to
receive an event from the Windows Server,
take it apart, look at it, and say, "Oh,
this needs to go to Window X,"
and hand it off to Window X.
Which brings us to the next class,
NS Window.
NSWindows reserves screen
real estate for you.
NSWindows do not themselves draw,
but they handle the necessary
coordination between other
windows and other applications
to reserve space for you to draw.
When an NSWindow receives an event,
it does the work of translating the
raw event into the correct responder
method and then handing it off to the
correct responder to process the event.
Well, the events usually come
in one of two kinds.
They either have a location
associated with them,
in which case they're going to go
to whatever responder corresponds
to that location inside the window.
Or they're something like a key event,
which don't have a particular location.
For that second kind of event,
NSWindows maintain a special instance
variable called the first responder.
The first responder is that
item inside the window that
gets first crack at key events.
And that first responder will
change as the application,
as the application runs and
the user clicks in different
text fields and so on.
Okay, the final NS Responder subclass
I'm going to talk about is NS View.
Like NS Responder,
NS View is an abstract class,
and it adds the necessary structure
for drawing to the screen.
It's very simple.
You just override the drawRect
method on any NS View subclass,
and that's where the drawing is done.
The views live inside of a
hierarchy inside a window,
so every view has one superview
and potentially many subviews.
Subviews are automatically clipped
to their superview's bounds.
And NS View is where you're
going to find all of the basic
support for the UI notions that
your users are going to expect,
things like drag and drop,
context-sensitive menus, tooltips.
What you would do if you were
interested in one of these
subsystems is you'd open up NS View,
find the set of methods that
pertain to the particular piece
that you're interested in,
and just override those as
directed by the documentation.
So I said NSViews draw.
That doesn't mean that you're kind
of left without recourse in draw
rect and you suddenly find yourself
twiddling bits on the screen.
We provide a number of objects inside of
the kit to help you with your drawing.
At the top of the list
here we have NSImageRept,
String, and AttributedString,
all of which know how to draw
to a particular location.
NSImage provides compositing support,
so that's how you get transparency as
well as a number of special effects and
compositing images over one another.
NSBezierPath gives you abstract drawing
in sort of the PostScript sense,
where you're drawing lines, circles,
rectangles, paths.
NSColor and NSFont allow you to
set the correct color and font
in the current graphics context.
And finally,
NSCell allows you to encapsulate bits of
drawing for reuse in several different
locations or by several different views.
We also provide a number
of concrete subclasses of
NSView ready to use in the kit.
NSTextView is one such that
we saw in TextEdit Lite.
Here I've composited together a
number of images that show a number
of the different views on the system.
So in the frontmost window we
have an NSOutlineView being
displayed inside an NSTabView.
Behind that, you can see NS Ruler View in
an NS Text View as well.
And at the very back,
we see an NS Table View being
used inside of Mail.
So now that I've walked you through
the basics of NS Responder and NS View,
you have the pieces you need to
respond to events and to draw.
At this point,
I'm going to invite my manager, Ali Ozer,
up onto the stage,
and he's going to show you a simple
application that uses those two pieces.
Ali?
OK, so my example here,
the demo I'm going to show you,
is going to approach the AppKit at a
much lower level than Mike's example did.
Basically, as Becky said,
we're just going to show you how
to subclass NSView for the purposes
of modifying the way it draws and
modifying the way it handles events.
There's many other things you
can do in NSView-- tooltips,
drag and drop, and et cetera.
We won't go into all that.
But it's going to be equally easy,
trust me.
So like Mike,
we start off with Project Builder.
We go ahead and create a new project.
This time I'm just going to
create a Cocoa application,
not a Cocoa document-based application,
because we're just creating a one-window,
very simple application.
It's going to ask for a project name.
Let's call it Dot.
Our goal here is to create
an application which,
when you click somewhere,
draws a dot there.
And when you click elsewhere,
it just moves the dot
to wherever you clicked.
So that's it.
Okay, so there you go.
It created a template for us.
Now, in this case,
the template is really simple.
We've got no classes.
All we have is the main file
that Mike's application also had.
And other than that,
there's nothing else.
It also gives us an interface builder,
a Nib file, like Mike's program did,
because all Cocoa applications
have a Nib file,
at least to represent the menu.
And then, of course,
it can represent windows
and panels and so on.
So that's all we get here.
Now, again, just so that I don't end
up typing lots of code,
I have the code written up already.
Let's go ahead and say add files.
And we have a class
file and a header file.
Now, Mike showed you Java,
and I'm going to show you Objective-C.
At the risk of scaring
some of you who might say,
what is that?
Objective-C is really,
it's the original language
that Cocoa used to use,
and we've added support for
Java over the last four years.
Objective-C is basically a superset of C,
and it's very simple, and you'll see.
It's just a little syntactic
addition to C that allows you to
have a dynamic runtime and message
sending that's fairly powerful.
So I'm going to add these
two files to my project.
We're going to copy
them into the project.
So there you go.
So first I'm going to
show you the H file.
The H file is where we declare
our object and tell the system,
tell the compiler what it has.
In this case, we're importing,
which is the same as including, Cocoa.h,
which is basically what
everybody includes.
And then here, this is Objective-C ways,
the way Objective-C declares an object.
DotView, which is our view,
is a subclass of NSView.
In addition to all the instance
variables NSView might have,
and all of the functionality NSView has,
we add three new instance variables:
a variable that declares
where our dot appears,
the color of our dot,
and the radius of our dot.
So we have these three
properties in our view.
Now let's go to the Meet the
Class file for DotView.
This indicates that's implementation.
We basically first override
the initWithFrame method,
which is the constructor, if you will,
for the NSView class.
Here we basically tell the superview,
which is tell our superclass, NSView,
to create itself.
Then we simply initialize the three
instance variables that we have.
It's a good idea to initialize
your instance variables,
basic object-oriented programming.
So we set the center point to 50,
the radius to 5.
Now notice that color is another object.
It's an NSObject.
It's an NSColor.
And Becky mentioned that.
That was one of the objects
we used for drawing.
We basically get one
of the prebuilt colors,
a red color, and we'll retain it.
Basically we hang on to it because
it's a property of this view.
So that's that.
And the other two things we do in this
example is draw and handleMouseUp.
The drawRack method,
which Becky talked about,
is basically where you override
to do your custom drawing.
In this case, we simply...
Get a white color and set,
and then draw our bounds.
And basiopath with rect
basically draws a rectangle.
In this case,
we just fill the whole bounds
of our view with white.
And then we go ahead,
set the color we have,
in this case it's red,
and then we create a rectangle,
which is equivalent to the size
of the dot we want to draw,
and then we draw an oval with that shape.
Now, oval, that's square,
within a square is circle,
so we get a circle, and then we fill it.
So these two lines draw white,
and then put the dot where the center is.
And finally, our mouse-up method.
Now, in NSV,
you can override methods like mouse-up,
key-up, mouse-drag,
etc., to handle various events.
In this case,
we're just interested in mouse-up.
And all we want to do is we
take the location of the event,
which is in terms of window coordinates,
and using this method,
we convert it to the
current view's coordinates.
And this takes care of
whether the view is scrolled,
whether it's magnified, whatever,
and this gives back our center point.
And then we simply call this method,
which tells the view that
it needs to be refreshed.
And the next, whenever it's appropriate,
the view will redraw itself,
refresh itself.
So that's it, as far as the code goes.
Now, just like Mike did,
we also need to change
our interface file.
Let me hide project builder here.
Now, I just opened my interface
file in interface builder.
In Mike's case, he dragged a text view.
In our case,
we are creating our own view,
so we're going to drag this
view that says custom view.
Basically, here we're saying we're not
using a pre-built object,
we're using our own object.
Let's make it as big as the window here.
Let's make the window a little smaller.
Now, we also want to tell the
system about this view.
So we go to the classes tab,
we choose an S view, and we say subclass.
And we specify that it's dot view.
There are two ways to do this.
You can either enter the class
name and properties here,
or you can actually
parse the header file.
In this case,
I just want to show you how you do this.
So, now dot view is known to the
interface builder runtime.
So we go back in here,
we bring up our inspector,
and we specify that this
view is really a dot view.
And as you can see,
it changed into a dot view.
I think that's all we really need to do.
One more thing we can do is maybe go
to the size inspector and make sure
that whenever the window resizes,
the view resizes.
There are a lot of other
properties you can set.
This is the only one I will do.
I will save, and I will hide.
Let's go back into project builder.
And I think we're ready to go,
so I will just say build.
Okay, we're done.
So let's run this.
Let me hide Project Builder.
So here is our application.
As you can see, the view is there.
The view is white because we
told to draw a white background.
I hope you can see the difference
between the pattern here.
And there's our dot at location 5050.
So as I click around,
the dot basically moves
to a new location.
The center is updated,
the view is told to update,
and there you go.
Now if I draw in the
corner here or on the side,
you see that's clipped to the bounds
of the view because automatic,
by default, views will clip.
In addition, if I put the dot here
and I resize my window,
you see that the view is resized
and the dynamic resizing takes
care of everything for you,
and the view is constantly redrawn
using that drawRack method.
So there you go.
That's a pretty simple demo
of event and drawing handling.
So... Great.
Thank you.
Okay, so we have one last class to talk
about in the core AppKit hierarchy,
and that's NS Control.
As a subclass of NS Responder,
NS Control inherits all the basic
infrastructure it needs to handle events,
and as a subclass of NS View,
it inherits everything it needs to draw.
So control combines those two
concepts to add this notion of being
triggered or activated by user events.
Every control defines what it means
for that control to be activated,
and at that point,
it's going to do something special.
It's going to send its action
method to its target object.
So target is a very special
instance variable for controls.
It's usually connected
to one of your objects,
whatever object you want to respond
to the control being activated.
And then the action method tells
the control what method should
be invoked on the target object.
So some simple examples of controls are
things like buttons or text fields that
need to be triggered when the button is
clicked or when the text field is edited.
So, as I said,
when the control is triggered,
the action method is sent
to the target object.
Very simple.
So what happens if the target is null?
Well, this does not mean that
the action is lost.
Instead, this is the control's signal
that the action needs to be sent
through the responder chain,
starting with the first responder
of the frontmost window.
So some common examples of
null-targeted action methods
would be things like cut and copy.
Other menu commands
would be very similar,
where you really want whatever happens
to be frontmost to respond to the action.
Like NSView,
NSControl has a number of subclasses
provided inside of the kit,
ready to use without modification.
I've just listed some here,
starting with the very
basic ones like Button,
Slider, Text Field, ColorWell.
NSMatrix and NSScroller are
somewhat more sophisticated.
Matrix lays out a grid or array
of buttons or text fields,
whatever you want.
NSScroller is what you see at the
edge of a scroll view to allow you to
scroll through the view's contents.
And then we have some very
sophisticated controls like NSBrowser,
Table View, and Outline View,
which allow you to display
huge amounts of data.
So I'm going to ask Ali to come back
up here and extend dot view a little
bit and show us how controls work.
Ali?
It's usually upper management which
changes the future set on you,
but in this case,
I guess Becky is the slave driver.
OK, we'll make a better dot program here.
OK, so let's see.
We want to do two things to dot view.
It has three instance variables, center,
radius, and color.
We're able to change where
it appears by clicking.
Now we'd like to change the
other two attributes of the dot,
its size and its color.
Okay, so let's go back to our dot view.
There you go.
It's the same dot view we used before.
Now, again,
I put the code in the oven earlier,
and it seems to be ready.
I will just copy-paste out of here.
Back in here and I will
explain what it does.
So we want to be able to
modify the attributes of dot,
the dot, the radius, and the color.
So we have two methods.
One of them is called setRadius,
one of them is called setColor.
Now, the target action methods
typically always have one argument,
which is the sender.
And the sender could be the UI widget,
the UI control,
which caused that action to be sent.
So if a button was clicked,
the button is going to be the sender?
Exactly.
Now, in the case of radius,
typically the control that
you're going to use is going
to have a floating point value,
17, 89, 42, whatever.
So in this case, setRadius gets called,
and we set our radius instance
variable from the floating
point value of the sender.
And the sender can be a text field,
a slider, or whatever.
So we just ask for its
floating point value,
and that's the radius.
And then just like we did earlier,
we tell the view that
needs to be displayed,
because the parameter,
some parameter has changed.
Now,
color is a little more sophisticated.
The sender is going to be
something that supplies a color,
because we want the color to be changed.
Now, Becky talked about NSColorView.
That's one view subclass,
which is a control,
which can provide colors.
It's tied to the color panel,
and based on changes in the color panel,
it supplies colors.
And because colors are objects,
we first release, that is,
deallocate the previous color we had.
Then we get the new color,
again from the sender, and we retain it.
We hang on to it.
We use reference counting and co-co,
and basically you see
that in action here.
And then just like the radius method,
we tell the view, set needs display.
So that's all the changes
we need to do to dot view.
And we also have to change the interface,
though.
So let me hide project builder,
bring interface builder back up.
Okay, so here's our dot view.
Let's clean up the window here.
Let's move the dot view up to make room.
And let's bring our palette back.
As you can see,
there are some default elements here,
the pre-built objects,
as I mentioned earlier.
So let's use a slider
to indicate the radius.
I'm going to go to the inspector here
and change the slider's properties.
I'm going to make it go
from a minimum of one,
default value of five, to a maximum of,
say, 300.
Now, to set the color,
we're going to use a color well,
which is this little widget.
I'm going to put that here.
This basically is fairly straightforward.
It's ready to use.
Now,
there are two other things we need to do,
which is to tell...
Tell Interface Builder what the
actions that this dot view has.
And we do that by going back to our
little classes inspector here and...
Control clicking to get up a context menu
and saying we're going to add actions.
That will put us into this mode where
we're able to add actions and outlets.
So let's add actions.
The two we added were set radius.
and Seth Culler.
Now, as you can see, DotView now lists
Seth Culler and Seth Radius.
In addition, it lists facts and print,
which are action methods
inherited from View.
They're always there.
Okay, so I think we're done here.
We want to build those connections.
Pardon?
Build the connections.
Oh yeah, that's right.
We do want to build the connections.
Yes.
Okay, so we told DotView what it does.
We added our action things.
Now we want to form the connections.
Now if we didn't do this,
it would have been very
apparent when I ran the program.
To form connections,
you Control-click and you drag.
So the slider is
connected to the DotView,
and the message we want
to invoke is setRadius.
And the ColorView is
connected to the DotView,
and the action we want
to send is setColor.
So when this is invoked,
it'll send setRadius.
When that's invoked, setColor.
Pretty straightforward.
We'll save here and we'll hide.
Let's bring project builder back.
Let's build.
Okay, it's done.
Let's run.
So there's our window.
Again, this seems to be a regression,
full regression testing
indicates it's still working.
That's good.
Let's test the radius.
Oh yeah, look at that.
So it says, it sets this radius,
says set needs display, yes,
and the view system
eventually displays it.
There you go.
Let's also try the color bit.
When you click on that,
the color panel pops up,
because one way to modify the color
here is obviously the color panel.
And as you move the
color in the color wheel,
the color over there is changing.
As you can see, again,
the action is being sent
and everything happens.
And I think that's all I want to show.
Great.
Thanks, Ali.
Thank you.
I'm telling you,
you've got to watch management.
They stop coding and
everything goes well.
And then they start using
terms like regression testing.
Okay,
so let's move on now from talking about
the basic classes inside of the kit to
talk about some of the abstractions that
we use to make it possible for you to
extend the functionality already there.
We already talked about one.
We talked about target action.
That's an abstraction provided by
controls to make it easy for you to
customize the behavior when a control,
like a button, is triggered.
Two others that are very important
are notification and delegation.
And then finally,
I'm going to talk a little bit
about some of the data abstractions
we provide direct inside the kit.
So notifications is actually a
concept that comes from foundation.
And we use it to broadcast
events throughout an application
or to other applications.
The basic idea is that when
something important happens,
you want to notify other people
who are interested in it.
So the kit defines a number
of custom notifications,
and I've listed three of them here.
Things like NSWindowWillClose,
NSApplicationWillTerminate,
or NSTextDidBeginEditing.
And you can see here the idea is that
some major piece inside your application
is about to do something important.
The way notifications work is they
rendezvous via the Notification Center.
So people who are interested,
objects that are interested in
hearing about these notifications,
go to the Notification Center and
register themselves as observers.
You would say something like,
"I'm interested in knowing
when a window closes,
this is the window I'm interested in,
and this is the method
that I want triggered."
Posters then, when they wish to post,
go to the same notification
center and say,
"Please send the notification
NSWindow did close." The relevant
object is this window,
and then they can also provide a
dictionary of additional information
if there's any extra information they
want carried with the notification.
A very similar concept is delegation.
Delegation allows one object
to act on behalf of another.
So several of the different
Kit classes support delegates.
The idea behind this is to allow you,
the developers, to avoid subclassing just
because you want to provide a
small amount of customization.
We do not think it is appropriate
to subclass NSWindow just because
you want to detect when the window
is closed and provide a little
custom behavior at that point.
By not subclassing, you can do this in a
much lighter weight way.
This also allows several objects
to share a single delegate,
saving on memory size.
Unlike notifications which
are strictly passive,
the delegate object is allowed to
affect the process as it takes place.
So, whereas we have the notifications
NSWindowWillClose and NSWindowDidClose,
the matching delegate
method is WindowShouldClose.
So, when the window goes to close,
it will send the delegate
the method WindowShouldClose.
At that point,
the delegate can do whatever it wants,
and ultimately will return either
"yes" meaning "allow the window to
go through its closing procedure" or
"no" the window must remain on screen.
So to implement a delegate,
you need to choose an object on
your side to be the delegate,
and you need to choose the kit
object you wish to delegate from.
Look up the class for the kit object.
You will find a list of delegate
methods available to you.
Read the documentation and
figure out which of those
methods are of interest to you,
and override only those.
Once you're done with all of that,
just call kit object set delegate,
passing your object's reference.
Okay.
Now, like I said,
delegation and notification
are very similar concepts.
They're ways that your objects get
informed about important things
happening in the user interface.
But there are some very
important differences.
Notification observers
are strictly passive.
They are merely being informed
that a change is taking place.
Delegates, on the other hand,
are active and permitted to interfere
with the process and even prevent
the change from taking place.
As a side effect of this,
there will only ever be one
delegate for a given kit object.
On the other hand,
there are as many observers as care to
register with the Notification Center.
And you'll see this
difference in the naming.
As I said, notifications usually have the
word "will" or "did" in the name
to show that a change is about to
or has just completed taking place.
Delegate methods tend to be named
"should" and have a return value
that the delegate can use to prevent
or change the behavior of the
change that was going to take place.
That's all I have on
notifications and delegation.
Now I'm going to talk a little bit about
the data abstractions inside the kit.
By and large, the kit is centered around
drawing and event handling.
So most of the classes in
there are subclasses of NSView,
or NSResponder, as I said.
However,
we do provide a few pure data objects,
and those surround
these data abstractions.
I've listed a few of them here.
NSDocument is the central-most
class in the document architecture.
It's what Mike used to represent
that text document in memory.
NSImage and NSImageRep are used to
represent images and the multiple
representations that they may have.
NSFont is an abstract
representation of a font.
NSAttributedString allows you to
store attributes over a string.
So beyond just the characters,
you can mark particular regions
as having particular attributes,
like italics, like a particular font.
And then finally, NSColor,
which we saw in dot view,
represents a color.
So, when you look at a Cocoa application
and it all comes together,
this is what you're going to see.
There is a single
NS application instance,
which handles all the communication
to the rest of the system as a whole.
It also maintains the list of
windows inside of the application.
NS applications have a delegate,
which you can choose to implement.
NS windows have delegates, again,
which you can connect
and choose to implement.
And then those objects are going to
talk down to whatever data objects you
use to represent your internal data,
the things that are peculiar
to your application.
If we take a close-up
look on that window,
we can see that inside the window there
are a number of views being displayed,
one of which might be a custom NS view,
like that dot view that we used.
You might also have a number of
concrete subclasses of NS control
that are kit objects that you're
using directly from the box.
All of those are talking
down to the layer below it,
which I've represented here
simply as a window delegate.
It could, of course,
be several different objects
of several different classes.
And then off the bottom,
that talks down to your
data model underneath.
All right,
that's all I have to tell you today
about the kit and about Foundation.
But I am going to give you
a couple pointers for where
to go for more information.
The first of these is documentation.
You would be just amazed at how much
documentation is on your DP4 CD.
You can find the release notes there.
There's overview documentation,
which goes through everything
I've talked about here,
as well as a number of
other different concepts.
There are programming topics
that are covered in-depth in
particular documentation files.
The class references are all online.
They give a complete list of all of
the methods on the different classes
and what the methods are used for.
And then finally,
there's a fair bit of example code,
including the TextEdit application,
which I mentioned earlier.
To find the documentation, look in
System Developer Documentation Cocoa.
All of that is also available on the
web at developer.apple.com/techpubs.
And the example code can be found in
System Developer Examples App Kit.
All right, finally,
where do you go from here?
These are some sessions that
I think are worth taking a look at.
Cocoa In-Depth is the
follow-on session to this one.
As I mentioned,
they're going to be talking
about the text subsystem there,
as well as the document architecture,
and a number of other more
complicated concepts that we did
not have time to discuss here.
Cocoa Update is where we're going
to talk about what's changed
since we met here last year.
Just a word of warning,
that talk does assume that you
are already familiar with Cocoa as
it appeared in DP1 last year,
which does not mean you should
not go just because you're
not familiar with Cocoa.
Just a warning that you might
find yourself in a little deep.
The next line is a mistake.
You're not interested in
Core Foundation Advanced.
You're interested in
Core Foundation Basics.
That's 124 in Hall A1
tomorrow morning at 10,
I believe.
And that's where you can find out
about property lists in greater detail.
And then again,
Project Builder and especially
Interfacer Builder are definitely worth
taking a look at if you're not familiar
with them and how they are used.
And I've listed their two
introductory sessions here.
Finally, I'm going to invite
David Wright back up on stage.
David?
Ah, there we go.
And he's going to take us
through the Q&A as well,
so if you want to start getting
to the microphones in the aisles,
that'd be great.
David Wright: Great.
Thanks, Becky.
Thanks, you guys, for the demos.
Let's give it up for him.